# Bridge_Data_Analysis
##Exploratory analysis of the National Bridge Inventory Dataset and Model Development

The aim of this project is to demonstrate the implementation of various machine learning algorithms on a given dataset. The dataset used is the popular NBI bridge dataset provided by the Federal Highway Administration and it can be accessed from the famous UC Irvine dataset repository. The bridge data has no specified target variable thus making it suitable for unsupervised learning problems such as clustering. In this project, however, clustering is first conducted and the cluster labels, which are 1 and 2 in this case, were used to assign labels (class 1 deterioration and class 2 deterioration) to the data. It is important to mention, however, that this nomenclature from the clustering, which are referred to as class 1 deterioration and class 2 deterioration in this exercise, is just an attempt to demonstrate that it is possible to convert unlabeled data to labeled data and may not hold any true importance in bridge deterioration studies. Once this was done, supervised learning was performed. These include logistic regression, KNN and Deep Neural Network. Similarly, Principal Component Analysis was conducted to reduce the variable space and the principal components were used as variables for another logistic regression model. ROC curves were plotted for these models and their performances were compared using the accuracy and F1-score metrics.

The dataset is a “.csv” file consisting of 22 sheets, each representing the data for a given year between 1995 and 2013. Each sheet has 8 data tables where each table has 52 rows representing all the states in the USA including the District of Colombia and Puerto Rico, and 23 columns representing the measured total area of several bridge components. In addition to the total area of the components, the condition states which could be either structural deficient, functionally deficient or combination of both were also presented separately. Of all the 23 components, 13 were considered because the remaining seem to have several missing data points or zero measured area, indicating that some states do not have those types of bridges. For simplicity, the total area of structures and the area of deficient structures were considered. A new data table for structural deficiency ratio was obtained by dividing the total area of deficient structures by the total area of structures. Following this operation, missing data “NAN” due to the division operation where the total area is zero were replaced by 0 for completeness. This preprocessing was conducted by writing a python script that automatically extracts data from all the sheets to capture information from all the years. The resulting dataset from this process has a dimension of 1144 by 13.
